---
layout: post
title: "What's New in Sinatra 0.9.0"
author: Ryan Tomayko
author_url: http://tomayko.com/about
publish_date: Sunday, January 18, 2009
---

This is the first in a series of 0.9.x releases designed to move Sinatra toward
a rock solid 1.0. While we were able to add a touch of new hotness in this
release, the major focus has been on getting the codebase shaped up for future
development. Many longstanding bugs and minor annoyances were corrected along
the way.

Sinatra's internal classes and methods have changed significantly in this
release. Most apps written for 0.3.x will work just fine under the new codebase
but we've begun adding deprecation warnings for things slated to be ripped out
completely in 1.0. __Please test your apps before upgrading production
environments to the 0.9.0 gem.__ We're committed to keeping existing apps
running through 0.9.x so report compatibility issues through
[the normal channels](/contributing.html).

With that out of the way, here are some of the new features to look out for
in 0.9.0.

## Sinatra::Base and Proper Rack Citizenship

Sinatra can now be used to build modular / reusable
[Rack](http://rack.rubyforge.org/) applications and middleware components. This
means that multiple Sinatra applications can now be run in isolation and
co-exist peacefully with other Rack based frameworks.

Requiring `'sinatra/base'` instead of `'sinatra'` causes a subset of Sinatra's
features to be loaded. No methods are added to the top-level and the
command-line / auto-running features are disabled. Subclassing `Sinatra::Base`
creates a Rack component with the familiar Sinatra DSL methods available in
class scope. These classes can then be run as Rack applications or used as
middleware components.

Proper documentation on this feature is in the works but here's a quick example
for illustration:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'sinatra/base'

class Foo < Sinatra::Base
  # all options are available for the setting:
  enable :static, :session
  set :root, File.dirname(__FILE__)

  # each subclass has its own private middleware stack:
  use Rack::Deflator

  # instance methods are helper methods and are available from
  # within filters, routes, and views:
  def em(text)
    "<em>#{text}</em>"
  end

  # routes are defined as usual:
  get '/hello/:person' do
    "Hello " + em(params[:person])
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

That thing can be plugged in anywhere along a Rack pipeline. For instance,
once Rails 2.3 ships, you'll be able to use Sinatra apps to build
[Rails Metal](http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2008/12/17/introducing-rails-metal).

Jesse Newland and Jon Crosby are
[already experimenting](http://blog.joncrosby.me/post/72451217/a-world-of-middleware).
Very hot.

## Nested Params

Form parameters with subscripts are now parsed into a nested/recursive
Hash structure. Here's a form:

{% highlight html %}
<form method='POST' action='/guestbook/'>
  <input type='text' name='person[name]'>
  <input type='text' name='person[email]'>
  <textarea name='note'></textarea>
</form>
{% endhighlight %}

It looks like this on the wire:

    person[name]=Frank&person[email]=frank@theritz.com&message=Stay%20cool

Sinatra turns it into a nested Hash structure when accessed through
the `params` method:

{% highlight ruby %}
post '/guestbook/' do
  params[:person]    # => { :name => 'Frank', :email => 'frank@theritz.com' }
  "Hi #{person[:name]}! Thanks for signing my guestbook."
end
{% endhighlight %}

This was a massively popular feature requests. Thanks to
[Nicolás Sanguinetti](http://foca.tumblr.com/) for the patch and
[Michael Fellinger](http://manveru.net/about_me) for the original
implementation.

## Routing with Regular Expressions

The route declaration methods (`get`, `put`, `post`, `put`, `delete`) now
take a Regexp as a pattern. Captures are made available to the route block
at `params[:captures]`:

{% highlight ruby %}
get %r{/foo/(bar|baz)/(\d+)} do
  # assuming: GET /foo/bar/42
  params[:captures]  # => ['bar', 42]
end
{% endhighlight %}

## Passing on a Route

We added a new request-level `pass` method that immediately exits the current
block and passes control to the next matching route. For example:

{% highlight ruby %}
get '/shoot/:person' do
  pass unless %w[Kenny Sherrif].include?(params[:person])
  "You shot #{params[:person]}."
end

get '/shoot/*' do
  "Missed!"
end
{% endhighlight %}

If no matching route is found after a `pass`, a `NotFound` exception is raised
and the application 404s as if no route had matched in the first place.

## Refined Test Framework

Sinatra's testing support no longer depends on `Test::Unit` (or any
specific test framework for that matter). Requiring `'sinatra/test'` brings in
the [`Sinatra::Test` module](/api/classes/Sinatra/Test.html) and the
[`Sinatra::TestHarness` class](/api/classes/Sinatra/TestHarness.html), which can
be used as necessary to simulate requests and make assertions about responses.

You can also require `sinatra/test/unit`, `sinatra/test/spec`,
`sinatra/test/rspec`, or `sinatra/test/bacon` to setup a framework-specific
testing environment. See the section on "Testing" in the [`README`](/intro.html)
for examples.

## More

See the [`CHANGES`](./changes.html) file for a comprehensive list of
enhancements, bug fixes, and deprecations.
